## My road to coding enlightenment

I am not claiming to be fully enlightened, I am just at the beginning of the road. I am jotting down the progression I have had to get to where I am currently.

My first programming-ish experience was learning Excel during my undergraduate Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering degree (2009-2013). I also took an Intro to Numerical Computing class but I don't remember much about it apart from the fact that it was pretty boring and I didn't really see how it applied to any of my other academic work. The first time I heard about Python was from a friend who mentioned how useful it was, he had a big book about it. I thought maybe that would be something useful to learn more about someday but parked it at that stage, it was more a buzzword than anything.

After receiving my undergraduate degree I worked for a civil engineering consulting firm. I was mostly in the field out on construction sites battling contractors but I had some mind-numbing days in the office copy-and-pasting stuff in Excel for hours on end, the same repetitive clicking process over and over, and I thought this doesn't feel like I should be doing it this way, there must be a better way, but at that point I didn't have the skills to do it any other way. 

I started my Masters degree in 2016, and again heavily used Excel for most of my assignments. Then I took Introduction to Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, which word on the street was that you had to learn programming in order to effectively complete the course. In the first day of class the professor (one of my favorites in all my academic career) said while it's technically possible to complete all coursework using Excel, and programming is not a requirement for this course, you will find things much easier if you can learn some basic programming. MATLAB was the tool of choice, using the Spyder IDE. This was my first big programming learning hump, figuring out how a loop works was a hair pulling out, bang on the desk in frustration experience, but once I finally got something to work it was like a revelation. I helped a PhD student with some soil testing in the lab, she had created a Python script for loading the lab test data CSV files, doing some analysis and creating some plots. I thought this was so advanced and cool, but had no idea how to create such a script.

I started my PhD in 2019. I was determined to learn Python so signed up for Charles Severance's Python for Everybody course on Coursera. This course was well-structured and interesting, I worked my way through the quizzes and assignments, but I still didn't quite get how to connect the things and apply them in my PhD work, once you start making these connections I think that's when things really start taking off.

Next I started spending some time at a consulting firm working in the field of quantitative interpretation of geophysical (seismic) data. The computing environment was unlike any I had experienced in a work setting previously. We used remote connection to access the company server, I learned how to use a Linux command prompt to navigate directories, move files, etc. All data analysis was done through running Python scripts, text editor was Emacs. This opened my eyes to a new world. A friend in the office sent me a link to Agile Scientific's blog, as I was trying to understand some basic seismic geophysics concepts (such as phase of a seismic signal). This blog and its authors are amazing. I read, or at least browsed, nearly every blog post dating back to November 2010. Along with the blogs there are some great tutorials showing how to do various data analysis tasks in Python. The Software Underground community is awesome, the Transform online conference tutorials on YouTube are awesome.

From there I started doing more of my own coding. I searched "seismic data python" in YouTube and found Tutorial: Practical seismic in Python, on the Software Underground channel. Watching this video, I learned how to use the open-source segyio library to load seismic data (SEG-Y files) into NumPy ndarrays. This was the next revelation for me, and was the start of a lot of doors opening for my PhD research. Previous to this, I had used Schlumberger's commercial Petrel E&P software for loading, visualizing, and analyzing seismic data. I felt as though the fancy GUI created a level of disconnect between me and the data. Suddenly, through the use of segyio (and other open source packages like Matplotlib) I had a much greater understanding of the SEG-Y file format and seismic data. I learned how to better use resources like StackOverflow (for example if you find a question similar to yours on SO and there are only 1 or 2 upvotes you are most likely doing something the wrong way), and just improved my Google-fu in general.

The next cool thing was learning to use VS Code as my text editor, I learned about version control using Git, and learned to use GitHub for creating a repository, and pulling and pushing code (and more recently making use of GitHub Pages to create this blog!). So far, I had pretty much exclusively been programming using the Python language. I came across Harvard's Introduction to Computer Science (CS50x) edX course and was hooked. The course starts out with programming in C, then branches out to other languages, including Python, SQL, JavaScript, and others (there is also a  Python-specific course CS50P). The professor, David Malan, has enthusiasm, passion, and energy that are infectious, it was amazing to me that even watching on a computer screen, I felt inspired, and his style of lecturing and live coding are super effective and fun to follow along with. After watching the lectures I was able to create my first web application using the Flask framework, with some CSS, HTML, and Jinja code, hosted through Amazon Web Services (still figuring out this world). Some friends and I like to bet on the F1 races so, over the course of about two weekends, I created a web app allowing us to do this online.

I must say, I am totally hooked on programming now and always looking to learn more. Most of my coding to date has been in the procedural style, but I am trying to get better at modularizing my code. I still haven't fully grasped the object-oriented programming style and how it relates to the coding I am doing as part of my PhD work, it is a work in progress. I am inspired by open-source software projects and open science and hope to make a contribution if I can at some point, because I have learned and benefitted from these things in many ways, and I want to give back. Some future goals for me include learning more about creating effective tests and documentation, and publishing a package on PyPI. 

My latest exciting thing: I have started using Sam Aaron's Sonic Pi to make music and am working through the tutorial now, it is awesome.

<!-- CrashCourse, where the name “bug” came from 
The Code Issue
Now fully immersed, Hacker News, Sonic Pi, Dylan Beattie talks, BitWarden, NetNewsWire RSS, One Foot Tsunami, Simon Willison’s Weblog -->
